/*

	Descriptions of various plants
	http://www.mortonarb.org/trees-plants/tree-plant-descriptions

*/

a handsome woody vine that clings and climbs by attaching itself with tiny rootlets to a wall, trellis, or other support.  In early July, it has flat, lacy clusters of fragrant small white flowers that show up well against the glossy green leaves. The horizontal branching pattern can create interesting, sculptural effects against a wall, and the cinnamon-brown bark on older stems peels to create an interesting texture that is attractive in winter. Over the course of years, it may reach 30 to 80 feet in length. This vine can also be used as a ground cover in shady areas.

 twists and spirals around a supporting plant, trellis or arbor.  In summer, Goldflame honeysuckle has clusters of fragrant tubular flowers in vibrant pink and yellow that bloom amid the vines.  Unlike some species of honeysuckle, it is not invasive.

 will twist and spiral up any support, but is best placed in a site where it can enjoy partial shade to avoid sun scorch.  The twining vine has showy foliage of pink, red, silvery-white, and green and small, white, fragrant flowers in mid-May.  They are followed by small, aromatic, sweet, fuzzy fruits. 

an excellent vine for wood or stone fences, walls, and arbors.  It attaches to hard surfaces by root-like holdfasts.  Cinnamon-brown bark and large, white lace cap flowers in late June add to the beauty of this climbing vine. 

a woody, clinging vine which attaches itself to structures by aerial rootlets. It can rapidly grow to 30 to 40 feet high. Terminal clusters of 2 to 3 inch long, red trumpet-shaped flowers attract hummingbirds throughout the summer.

an aggressive, woody vine native to the Midwest and the Chicago region.  This vine is often found growing up tree trunks in native woods, but it can be trained to grow on a fence or arbor. In early autumn the compound, 5-leaflet leaves turn a brilliant red.

a fast growing, versatile ground cover.  Many different cultivars are available.  Wintercreeper should be used with care as it is considered invasive in some locations.

This name covers a number of very popular hybrids between English and Japanese yew species that have many purposes in the landscape. These shrubs often are used as specimens, foundation plants, in groups, or sheared as a hedge.  Hardy and resilient, yews are very tolerant of urban conditions and are unusual among evergreens in that they can tolerate heavy shade. They also can stand severe pruning and shearing, which most evergreens cannot. Ango-Japanese yews tend to be fairly narrow when young, becoming wider with age.  The needles are a lustrous dark green above and pale green beneath. The dark green of yews makes a fine background for other plants. Be aware that the leaves, seeds, and bark of all yews are poisonous.

spring when it is covered with pink flowers.  During the rest of the season it offers little in the way of ornamental appeal and best planted at the back of a border.

Whether planted in sun, or heavy shade, the black jetbead will prosper, making it a great shrub for shady sites, as a specimen or border plant. Showy white flowers, crisp green foliage, and black fruit clusters make this shrub distinct throughout the growing season.

Plant advice from The Morton Arboretum: Blood-twigged dogwood is a medium-sized shrub, popular mainly for its straight stems and branches, which turn a mix of green and red in winter. It has flat-topped fluffy clusters of white flowers, more smelly than fragrant, in late summer, followed by small black fruit.

This mounded woody plant has cornflower-blue flowers in late summer and fragrant, silvery-green foliage. Though bluebeard is technically a shrub, it should be treated as a perennial in the Midwest because it tends to die back in harsh winters.

excellent, low-growing evergreen shrubs with dark green, finely textured leaves. Boxwoods can be used in hedges, as rounded specimens and neatly compact background plants in any landscape.  Many of the boxwoods sold today are hybrids with complex parentage (see cultivars below)

low, dense spreading habit of bugleweed makes an excellent  ground cover for part-shade or shady areas.  The round green leaves often have a purple tinge and low, short spikes of violet-blue flowers add spring interest.