/*
Flora of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago
http://nature.ca/aaflora/data/index.htm
*/

is the most common and widespread species of the genus Equisetum (Hauke 1966). Its odd morphology has attracted much attention, and resulted in a remarkable number of infraspecific taxa being described. The most extreme treatment has been by Gandoger (1891) who recognised 62 forms.
These extreme treatments are, in part, due to variation within clones. Hauke (1963) found that, as new stems are continually produced, young stems may have short, simple branches (forma varium Milde), but mature branches are long, frequently becoming branched (forma pseudo-sylvaticum Milde) and may develop dark teeth (forma nigricans Warnst). Also, stems produced when the surrounding vegetation is undeveloped may be low and spreading (forma decumbens Meyer). Rapp (1949) illustrated the effect of shifting sand in an Indiana dune on E. arvense s.l. where it produced forms alpestre Wahlenb., diffusum A.A. Eaton ex Gilbert, and decumbens Meyer, all on the same rhizome. Schaffner (1928) showed variation on a single plant with respect to branch number. Kato (1964) presented a graph showing that, at least in Japan, the lowermost nodes of a plant bore mostly 4-angled branches, the uppermost, mostly 3-angled. It was suggested that the difference in the number of angles is related to whether the plant is growing in sun or shade. Hauke (1963) suggested that this apparent correlation breaks down when one gets into the Arctic and the shade form disappears, but does it? The image library has a picture of a plant that was growing between rocks at 81°N and was possibly quite shaded.
One obvious feature of E. arvense is the dimorphism between its vegetative and fertile stems. All conditions exist, from fertile stems producing a few branches (var. irriguum) to fertile stems resembling the sterile stems. The latter forms are frequent northward, where they are often depauperate (E. calderi B. Boivin).
Hauke (1966) concluded that E. arvense is a noteworthy plant in the many different growth forms it can assume, but evidently these are only superficial modifications and none deserves taxonomic recognition. The reliable characters that characterise this species are as follows: rhizomes (including the internodes) felted, branches 3–4 angled, with the first branch internode longer than the subadjacent teeth, stem sheaths slightly longer than they are wide, slightly involute or appressed to the stem, and branch teeth with subulate tips. These characters, plus some internal anatomy characters, differentiate this species from all other taxa and remain essentially constant in spite of various gross plant modifications.
The physiology of fruiting is not understood. Whatever it is, there is a control mechanism that can be upset. Depending upon when and how it is disrupted, a fertile stem may develop branches, which is not surprising, since dormant branch apices are present. Conversely, a vegetative stem may develop a cone, which is less easily explained, since the shoot apical cell must change its pattern of activity. Occasionally, an apex begins to produce a cone then reverts to vegetative activity, and a proliferated cone is produced (illustrated in Hauke 1963).
Elven et al. (2005) state that "there have been many doubts about whether there is a separate arctic-alpine race or only a group of arctic modifications. A race was reluctantly accepted by Øllgaard in Jonsell (2000). Both Tzvelev and Elven tend to accept it as a subspecies, but Elven commented that its reported distribution in European Russia and Siberia seems very large compared with its strict restriction to northern high alpine and clearly arctic areas in northwestern Europe and North America. Schönswetter et al. (2001) argued for acceptance as a separate race, based on several morphological criteria." Hauke (1993, Flora of North America treatment, p. 81) states, ‘Among the many infraspecific taxa that have been named in this species [E. arvense s.l.], E. arvense var. boreale (Bong.) Á. Löve, has been most generally accepted and has been applied to plants with tall, erect stems with 3-ridged branches. Because both 3-ridged and 4-ridged branches may occur on a single stem, the variety boreale is not recognised here as distinct.’ Schönswetter et al. (2001) convincingly argued that the name 'borealis', more or less uniformly applied for this arctic-alpine race, has been misapplied. It is based on plants from Sitka in southeastern Alaska that differ from the arctic and high alpine plants in most morphological features. The next available name is Wahlenberg's var. alpestre.
Much of the material in the Flora region aligns with E. arvense var. alpestre, but further study is required on the North American specimens. Therefore, following Hauke (1993), here we treat this taxon as a species in the broad sense.
Field horsetail is well known to be a poisonous plant. Hay containing this weed is apparently more dangerous than the plants are when they are growing in pastures. The deaths of many horses, particularly young horses, have been reported to veterinarians, but there is reason to believe that many more losses are unreported

suggested that this species is probably always sterile in the Canadian Arctic Islands, but fertile specimens have been collected on Southampton, Coats, and Baffin Islands. Cones may mature in summer or they may overwinter and shed spores in the spring.
A diagnostic difference distinguishing this species from E. variegatum is that the base of the plant is strongly papillose (and dull), whereas it is almost smooth and shiny in E. variegatum. Very often the stems of E. scirpoides are papillose along the ridges, but this may also be observed in E. variegatum. The young or undamaged "teeth" have attenuated tips that are sometimes sufficiently long to twist, especially at the uppermost node of a stem branch. The stems are perennial and firm in E. scirpoides, whereas they are annual and soft in E. arvense.

The subspecies that occurs in the Arctic Archipelago is subsp. variegatum. Subspecies alaskanum occurs on continental North America and is distinguished from subsp. variegatum as follows: sheath teeth, erect, with prominent white margins, subsp. variegatum; sheath teeth incurved, with obscure margins or all black, subsp. alaskanum.
Arctic floras with Porsild as an author have indicated that this species has 6–8 sheath teeth at each node, which distinguishes it from E. scirpoides, which has 3–4 sheath teeth. Hauke (1993, Flora of North America treatment) indicates that E. variegatum may have 3–12 teeth per sheath, in fact overlapping with the values of E. scirpoides. According to Hauke (1993) these taxa are distinguished because in E. variegatum there are as many ridges to the sheaths as there are teeth, while in E. scirpoides there are twice as many ridges as teeth. (The number of ridges can be determined by cutting cross sections of the stem.)
Some authors claim that Schleicher's name of 1797 is a nomen nudum and that it was first validated by Weber and Mohr, Deut. Crypt. Gewächse 60: 447. 1807.

In striking contrast to Diphasiastrum and Huperzia, interspecific hybridisation is practically unknown in Lycopodium (Wagner and Beitel 1993).
The North American approach (Wagner and Beitel 1993) has been to neglect the variation in L. annotinum but to accept the variation in L. clavatum at the level of two species. In northwestern European and Russian views, these pairs of species/subspecies are considered comparable. The differences are mainly quantitative in both cases. Elven et al. (2003) chose to recognise subspecies in both cases, suggesting that they are pairs of closely related taxa with south to north distribution (Elven et al. 2003). Lycopodium annotinum subsp. alpestre is the only taxon of this genus in the flora region.
Plants intermediate between Lycopodium annotinum subsp. alpestre and L. annotinum subsp. annotinum are considered to belong to a form that has been called var. pungens (Bachelot de la Pylie) Desvaux. This is an invalid name (Wagner and Beitel 1993).

Cystopteris fragilis occurs at higher latitudes and/or elevations than other species of Cystopteris. It is a polymorphic complex, and morphologically distinct hexaploid cytotypes have been reported from disjunct populations in Ontario, Alaska, Arizona, Colorado, Montana, and Wyoming. Isozymic profiles of each of these populations indicate that the hexaploids are polyphyletic and should not be accorded species status (Haufler et al. 1993). Werth and Windham (1991) suggested that this polymorphic polyploid is probably actively speciating at the tetraploid level, perhaps through gene silencing.
The presence of verrucate spores (as opposed to the normal spiny spores) has been used to circumscribe Cystopteris dickieana. It is possible that the verrucate spore is a recessive feature controlled by one gene, or only a few genes. While present at low frequency in much of the range of C. fragilis, verrucate spores are particularly prominent in the Great Plains, and some specimens from the Arctic have been assigned to C. dickieana, although there is no agreement on such assignments.
Elven et al. (2003) discussed the separation of these entities: "The only consistent feature that separates 'dickieana' from 'fragilis' s.s. is the spore ornamentation. In the North Atlantic area there is no connection between this ornamentation and other morphological features, and it is impossible to separate 'dickieana' on macromorphology. It also occurs more or less occasionally within populations [see, e.g., Berg 1992, and Berg, in Jonsell 2000]. Cystopteris dickieana has been finally 'killed' as a taxon by the investigations published by Dyer et al. (2000) [Edinb. J. Bot. 57: 71–81] and Parks et al. (2000) [Edinb. J. Bot. 57: 83–105]. Even if the reticulate spore ornamentation has a certain geographic pattern, this is to be considered as a geographical variation in one character (possibly caused by a single gene), not associated with other characters, and not nearly enough for recognition of a taxon at any level" .

In Flora of North America (1993) this family was included in the Dryopteridaceae. The following selected sources recognise two families, Dryopteridaceae and Woodsiaceae (or families by synonymous names), Kramer and Green (1990), Tutin (1993), Czerepanov (1995), and Jonsell (2000). We have chosen to follow these authors.

 The reasons for placing this species in the family Tofieldiaceae are documented in the notes associated with the family.
Parker (2002) noted that what appear to be hybrids between Tofieldia pusilla and T. coccinea occasionally occur in Greenland and the Northwest Territories. They are characterised by a leafy bract at or near the middle of the stem and enlarged, crimson bracts below the pedicels. In some suspected hybrids, the bracts are absent, and fused bracteoles, truncate or lobed, sheathe the pedicels well below the flowers.
Tanaka (1981) reported that T. coccinea var. kondoi has small-sized chromosomes and 2n = 30. Utech (1978) reported on the floral vascular anatomy and floral morphology of T. coccinea.

Hultén (1968) indicated that var. borealis has a shorter, more compact spike of greater length than the leaves, low growth, and seems to be merely a growth form and apparently an adaptation to Northern conditions.
Haynes and Hellquist (2000), in the Flora of North America treatment, divided the species into three subspecies in North America - subsp. filiformis, alpina, and occidentalis - but their application outside North America is problematic. They consider the 'alpina' entity (described from Norway) as synonymous with the 'borealis' entity (described from North America), with priority for the former. Elven et al. (2005) suggested that this synonymisation may be artificial. The 'alpina' entity is considered by Russian and northwestern European botanists to be just a northern and alpine minor race or modification of the narrow-leaved 'filiformis', whereas 'borealis' seems to be a more significant broad-leaved North American entity. These authors proposed keeping 'alpina' and 'borealis' as different taxa and to synonymise the former with subsp. filiformis. The main character separating Eurasian and North American plants is leaf width, 0.2–0.4 versus 0.5–0.8 mm (Tzvelev and Elven, personal communication, 2002).
Haynes and Hellquist (2000) recorded subsp. alpina only for North America and Asia, but that is erroneous, as the name has a Norwegian typification. Blytt, who described subsp. alpina, referred to material from six sites in southern Norway (Blytt's annotated specimens are in O), and the type must be chosen among these (Tzvelev and Elven, May 2002, in discussion).
The Flora of North America treatment stated that no specimens of this taxon had been seen from Nunavut, but that it is to be expected there (Les and Haynes 1996). Vouchers specimens for the three Nunavut records on the map are housed at CAN.
Fassett (1940) considers this species to be a good duck food.
Porsild (1957) stated that plants are usually sterile in the Arctic. They are found in the muddy bottoms of shallow ponds.
The stipules of Stuckenia are adnate to the blade for two-thirds to nearly the entire length of the stipule. The few species of Potamogeton with adnate stipules have the adnation less than half the length of the stipule, or less than 4 mm. Submerged leaves of Stuckenia are opaque, channelled, and turgid, whereas those of Potamogeton are translucent, flat, and without grooves or channels (Les and Haynes 1996).

Potamogeton pusillus s.s. has been very much confused with the more northern P. berchtoldii. Several distinct and taxonomically assumed important differences separate them. Some sterile hybrids are reported but no fertile intermediates. They seem to be clear species. Haynes and Hellquist (2000) treated them as two (largely sympatric) subspecies but give no arguments for this. Elven et al. (2003) proposed treating the taxa as two species.
Scoggan's (1978) report of P. pusillus s.s. north to Hudson Bay (York Factory) suggested to Elven that there is some Canadian confusion in separating between P. berchtoldii and P. pusillus. Haynes and Hellquist (2000) excluded the Hudson Bay occurrences but mapped occurrences along Mackenzie River to the sea.
There are three vegetative specimens annotated by Haynes and Hellquist (1973) as "probably P. pusillus var. pusillus" collected further "up north" than 67°C on the Mackenzie River. There are specimens at CAN from 64–67°N in Western Greenland, but no reports from the Arctic Archipelago are known in 2003.

 This orchid is a pinkish brown colour, lacking chlorophyll. It is a saprophyte and gets its nutrients from mycorrhiza on the roots. Because of the complex relationship between the orchid and the environment in which it is growing, this species is almost impossible to transplant and should be left growing where it is found.
This species was first reported from Baffin Island in 1997 by Joyce Gould (Can. Field-Naturalist, 111: 471–472). She found this species in Auyuittuq National Park, Baffin Island, at two sites in 1995, and prepared a plant voucher from one of them. The specimen was deposited at DAO.
This species is circumboreal (Hultén 1968) and is known from continental Northwest territories north to treeline (Porsild 1943), Ungava (northern Quebec) (Cayouette 1984), and western Greenland (Hultén 1968). It was not an altogether unexpected find on southeastern Baffin Island (Gould 1997).
Both of the populations found by Gould (1997) were in fluvial deposits. One population was found on the east side of a river, "at the base of an end moraine and of a fluvial terrace just south of a small tributary, in a habitat dominated by Arctic willow (Salix arctica) and moss (Pohlia drummondii), and with Arctagrostis latifolia, Pyrola grandiflora, Poa arctica, Persicaria vivipara, Pedicularis flammea, and Carex species". The second population was found at the base of a colluvial slope, among Salix arctica, the moss Aulocomnium turgidum, and a species of the lichen Stereocaulon. Hultén (1968, p. 329) describes its habitat as "wet places, woods, bogs." Scoggan (1978, p. 528) notes the habitat as "bogs, thickets and woods", while in the Northwest territories, Porsild and Cody (1980, p. 213) describe the habitat as "turfy, open places".
Magrath and Freudenstein (2002) noted that Corallorhiza trifida is largely autogamous, although a syrphid fly (Syrphus cinctellus) was reported as a pollinator (Silen 1906). Various floral morphs exist, some with weak geographic corrections; they do not appear to warrant recognition.

Elven et al. (2003) noted that the most recent North American treatment (Brooks and Clemants 2000) of J. arcticus recognised three varieties, two as arctic (var. alaskanus and var. balticus). Brooks and Clemants (2000) stated that J. arcticus is "a wide-ranging and obviously polymorphic complex that has not read the literature."
Juncus arcticus and J. balticus were both originally described from northern Europe. In most of this area they are very different in general morphology and in many detailed features. When comparing a series of 'typical' plants, no one would be in doubt about them being two different species. But even in Europe the separation of them as species is now disputed.
Another problem to be resolved was whether the 'alaskanus' entity belonged as a race of J. arcticus or of J. balticus. Brooks and Clemants (2000) included most northern North American (including Greenland) material in their concept of var. alaskanus, but they allowed that "perhaps J. arcticus var. alaskanus is not distinct from the Eurasian J. arcticus var. arcticus". That is certainly the case with much of the Greenland material, which is indistinguishable from the northern European (type area) and Svalbard material. The Alaskan material is more different, but not very much so. The 'alaskanus' entity is obviously much closer to the Northern European 'arcticus' entity than it is to the northern European 'balticus'.
Elven et al. (2003) considered the options were either to "regard the entire complex as one large, polymorphic species with 4–5 subspecies, as two species (J. arcticus with the 'arcticus', 'alaskanus', and 'sitchensis' entities; J. balticus with the 'balticus' and 'littoralis' entities), or as numerous ill-defined, morphologically overlapping, and probably fully interfertile species." The 'littoralis' race is more southern, ranging from Alaska to Newfoundland, often inland (Porsild and Cody 1980).
In May, 2005, Elven and Aiken examined CAN specimens from Banks and Victoria Islands and concluded that they belong to subsp. arcticus. This was not expected, as subsp. arcticus is typified from Scandinavia. Subspecies arcticus has relatively delicate plants with small flowers in compact inflorescences; plants of subsp. alaskanus are coarse, with diffuse inflorescences (Elven, personal communication, May 2005). Also, Porsild and Cody (1980) had reported J. balticus subsp. alaskanus Hultén (synonymous with J. arcticus subsp. alaskanus Hultén) on adjacent continental North America, and also on Victoria and Banks Islands. Elven and Aiken could not separate the specimens collected in the eastern Canadian Arctic Islands on the anther, inflorescence, or capsule characters usually used to recognise separate subspecies. Therefore, currently, subsp. arcticus is recognised on the Canadian Arctic Islands.
Fontenla et al. (2001) studied the mycorrhizal status of plant species in northwestern Patagonia communities representative of Patagonian steppe and marshes including Juncus arcticus.
Cooper and MacDonald (2000) used J. arcticus in a revegetation experiment to restore rich fens that had been mined in Colorado. They found that Juncus arcticus and willow cuttings had differing patterns of survival with respect to the annual maximum height of the water table and that dominant species can be successfully reintroduced to mined surfaces with the appropriate hydrologic conditions. Cooper and MacDonald (2000) stated that human intervention would be necessary to rapidly re-establish plant cover and that the slow rate of peat accumulation means that restoration of the mined fens will require hundreds, if not thousands, of years.

 Polunin (1940) noted that this is "one of the most characteristic of all arctic phanerogams [and varies] little in any features that are of true taxonomic importance. However, in size and robustness it is liable to show great extremes in different habitats almost anywhere within the [eastern Canadian Arctic], varying from 2 to 30 cm in height, with the culms sometimes stout and sometimes very slender. It is also variable in the length and prominence of the "spathe" [leaf associated with the inflorescence] that subtends the flowers, this being generally longer in plants growing under favourable conditions, but often varying considerably on different culms coming from the same tuft." (p. 146).
A specimen from Ward Hunt Island, 83°N, at the northern edge of its range, has leaves longer than the flowering stems CAN (234211).
Danvind and Nilsson (1997) used J. biglumis in a study testing the hypothesis that diaspore buoyancy is an important factor in determining the distribution range of riparian plants. The authors measured the floating capacity of fruits and seeds from 17 alpine vascular plant species during one year along the free-flowing Vindelu River in northern Sweden. Minimum, median, mean, and maximum floating times of fruits and seeds were related to the downstream distribution of plants. The distances from the alpine headwater region to the most downstream occurrence of plants, and to the cessation of a more continuous distribution, were evaluated. The variation in downstream limits of plants could not be statistically explained by variation in seed buoyancy between species, indicating that floating ability of seeds is not important for plant distribution patterns.
Elven et al. (2003) noted that there might be some interesting unexplored variation in this common arctic-alpine species. Both the two main ploidy levels are known from Scandinavia. Most Scandinavian plants seem to differ morphologically from the majority of plants in the Arctic, in size (smaller), and in some other details.

Brooks and Clemants (2000) fully synonymised the 'leucochlamys' entity (Juncus castaneus Sm. subsp. leucochlamys (Zinger ex V. Krecz.) Hultén) with J. castaneus. Hultén first accepted them as species [Hultén 1943: 428] but later changed his opinion to subspecies after investigation of more material (Hultén 1967). Elven et al. (2003) followed Hultén's later viewpoint, because the taxa had been observed to intergrade in Alaska. They noted that there are plants from eastern Canada (e.g., from southern Baffin Island: Iqaluit) very different from Eurasiatic J. castaneus s.s. (Elven, after visiting the island in 1999).
Hultén (1968) noted that J. castaneus var. pallidus has pale perianth bracts and capsules, and often has few-flowered heads. It occurs in scattered localities. Polunin (1940) considered this a well-marked colour phase, which occurs only in the south.
Since Porsild (1957) new records have been collected on Ellesmere Island.

Polunin (1940) considered this species a "southern" type, apparently eking out a rather precarious existence in arctic and alpine regions and sometimes only 5 or 6 cm high, although more often attaining a height of some 15 cm.
Bayfield (1996), in a study of long-term changes in colonisation of bulldozed ski slopes, found that, generally where grass seeding was done, most local vascular species were more effective colonists of seeded than of untreated ground, but an exception was J. trifidus, which was more successful on unsown ground.
Marchand and Roach (1980), in a study of reproductive strategies of pioneering alpine species seed production, dispersal, and germination, found that J. trifidus showed high production of viable seed, high germination percentages, and relatively high (albeit short-range) seed mobility, combining the advantages of perennial longevity with reproductive vigour more typical of annuals. While J. trifidus appeared capable of sexual reproduction, successful invasion of disturbed sites was considered probably restricted to fairly local areas where there is a high fallout of seed.

Polunin (1940a) noted that this taxon is very common in the extreme south of the flora area but only occasional north of the Arctic Circle, where its place is largely taken by the earlier flowering, and otherwise better adapted, J. biglumis. Like that species, with which it is often associated, it grows chiefly in rather open areas of damp mud or clayey soil. Rarely more than 15 cm high, and often only 5–10 cm high, it is easily overlooked except when flowering, and hence rarely to be found in the collections of amateurs even from areas where it is plentiful. The distribution map presented here shows several more records for Ellesmere and Axel Heiberg Islands since Porsild (1957).
Porsild (1957, 1964) and Porsild and Cody (1980) referred all Canadian populations of J. triglumis s.l. (at least east of Mackenzie River), as well as the Greenland populations, to J. albescens. Hultén (1968) considered J. triglumis s.s. to be circumpolar.
The reported ploidy difference is an argument for recognition of J. triglumis (2n = 50) and J. albescens (2n = 130 – 134) as species, but the morphological and geographical data are ambiguous. A correlation between ploidy level and morphology is still not well established. Löve and Löve (1956) reported, e.g., both 2n = 50 and 2n = about 134 from Iceland where only J. triglumis s.s. is known to occur. At least one of the 'triglumis'-level counts is North American, disproving a North American (albescens) and Eurasian (triglumis) disjunction. Elven et al. (2003) favoured subspecific status for the two taxa. Brooks and Clemants (2000) accepted both (as varieties) for North America, largely as sympatric, but with 'albescens' as the most widespread. If the morphological distinctions are connected to the ploidal levels (this fact is not yet established), the choice is rather between two species or one polymorphic species, and rank as variety or subspecies is then inappropriate (Elven, personal communication, 2005).
Juncus triglumis is often reported as colonising silty disturbed areas, and tends to be locally sparse. It can be found in numerous habitat types, however, and at varying altitudes from coastal swales to upper mountain slopes as high as 1000 feet above sea level (CAN 370914). In tundra meadows, it can be found in Carex communities along with J. biglumis. In coastal wetlands, it occurs in extensive marshes with Eriophorum and Carex aquatilis var. minor. On black, mucky seepage slopes, it grows with Kobresia simpliciuscula and Eriophorum callitrix. On southern Baffin Island at Ogac Lake, it was reported in this habitat type with Trichophorum cespitosum and Pinguicula vulgaris (CAN 302048).
Juncus triglumis was found to be an early coloniser of oil spills in Alaska (Kershaw and Kershaw 1986).

The combination L. arcuata subsp. confusa was not formally made by Blytt (1861 p. 298), just cited in synonymy with reference to Hartman, but there with sufficient citation of basionym to be considered validly published (Elven et al. 2003).
Bliss and Svoboda (1984), in a study of soils, plant communities, and net annual plant production in the western Queen Elizabeth Islands, recognised a Luzula confusa graminoid steppe that was more productive than a Puccinellia barren. Bell and Bliss (1978) estimated that the roots of L. confusa live 7–13 years. Addison and Bliss (1984) reported on the adaptations of Luzula confusa to a polar semi-desert environment.
Van der Wal et al. (2000) manipulated the plant phenology of Luzula heathland plots in Spitsbergen (78°N) by adding or removing snow, which altered the time for plots (2 m × 2 m; n = 10) to become snow-free. Nitrogen content of the forage species decreased with time after snowmelt, whereas C:N ratio increased. Manipulation of snowmelt led to a shift in "phenological time", without altering these plant quality parameters as such. Early in the growing season, Svalbard reindeer (Rangifer tarandus platyrhynchus) selected the advanced plots which had been snow-free for longest, presumably because of the greater biomass of both Luzula confusa and Salix polaris, major components of reindeer diet at that time of the year. Phenolic content did not differ among treatments, and is therefore unlikely to play a role in reindeer selection for plots with early snowmelt. Unlike in temperate regions, where selection for plant quality seems to be of major importance, selection for plant quantity might be an outcome of generally low levels of plant biomass and high forage quality during the growing season in the High Arctic. Reindeer selection for high plant biomass is likely to lead to a more favourable nitrogen and energy return than selection for high plant quality.
Nakatsubo et al. (1998), as a part of the study on soil carbon flow in a deglaciated area in Svalbard (79°N), estimated the contribution of the belowground respiration of vascular plants, including Luzula confusa, to total soil respiration in August 1996. The respiratory activity and the Q10 value of the respiration were higher in S. polaris than in the other two species. Total soil respiration rates measured in the field varied widely. The areas with dense vegetation cover tended to show high respiration rates. The contribution of the belowground respiration to total soil respiration was negligible in the early stages of succession. On the other hand, the respiration of the belowground parts contributed to a significant proportion (approx. 29%) of the total soil respiration in the latter stages of succession.

