
/*
Flora of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago
http://nature.ca/aaflora/data/index.htm
*/

Elevation 0–400 m. Substrates: wet meadows, along streams, lakeshores, tundra, ridges, cliffs; imperfectly drained moist areas, seepage slopes, solifluction slopes, moderately well-drained areas; gravel, silt, clay, till, moss; with low organic content; calcareous. Hauke (1963) found that E. arvense occurs on a wide variety of substrates, clay, gravel, sand, crushed stone, and rich loam. Often plants appeared to be growing in dry areas, but these were usually obviously associated with ground-water supplies, in sites such as roadside fill above swampy places. He hypothesised that E. arvense is dependent on an abundant water supply and documented digging down into a recently filled area adjoining a swamp to discover that the Equisetum stems had come up through over 3 feet of sand, and that there was a horizontal rhizome system in the saturated swamp soil underlying the fill. Hauke (1963) also noted that the more open and harsh the habitat, the more depauperate and aborted the plants, indicating that external conditions, such as summer frosts, can change normal development.
Mossy carpets along the shore of a small kettle lake  wet muddy soil of lake plants growing in moss on small "islands" in a hanging fen

ridges; moderately well-drained areas; rocks, gravel; with low organic content. Limited to the most favourable habitats in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago

wet meadows, around the margins of ponds, marshes, along streams, river terraces; imperfectly drained moist areas (or standing water); sand, clay, moss; with low organic content (usually); calcareous. In saturated to poorly drained mineral soil near small ponds in a wet sedge meadow standing water at the edge of a shallow, possibly ephemeral pond  poorly drained, bare silt of a seepage slope growing in mossy mats 

slopes; imperfectly drained moist areas, moderately well-drained areas (snowbeds and southfacing slopes).

Elevation 10–1000 m (CAN 283948). Substrates: wet meadows, hummocks, snow patches, depressions of low-centre polygons; imperfectly drained moist areas, seepage slopes, moderately well-drained areas; sand, silt, clay; with high organic content, peat; acidic, or calcareous (CAN 4275), or non-calcareous (granite and gneiss). Snow areas with Cassiope (CAN 31198), dry igneous rock outcrop between bare rock outcrops, wet or moist depressions on southfacing moraine, gabbro outcrop, calcareous till veneer with heath species, tundra heath, with Dryas, Draba, and Saxifraga.

tundra (often in heath areas or herbmats, Porsild 1957); imperfectly drained moist areas (sunny places); gravel, sand, till; with low organic content; non-calcareous (granite or gneiss).

ridges, cliffs; dry, moderately well-drained areas. Recorded from calcareous ridges with good drainage, rock ledges at the base of cliffs, a calcareous gravel beach  a limestone gravel beach, dry rocky slopes  alpine scree, moist rock crevices on a sunny cliff, and a moist habitat with accumulated soil 

slopes, ridges, cliffs (and rock screes); dry, moderately well-drained areas; rocks, gravel, till; with low organic content; non-calcareous. In crevices and on earthen ledges of granitic outcrop.

ridges, cliffs; dry, moderately well-drained areas; rocks, gravel, sand; with low organic content.

hummocks, snow patches, around the margins of ponds, river terraces, tundra; imperfectly drained moist areas, dry, moderately well-drained areas; gravel, silt, till, moss; with low organic content; acidic, or calcareous.

snow patches, tundra; dry, moderately well-drained areas; gravel, moss; with low organic content; calcareous. Reported with ericaceous shrubs and often localised.

aquatic; silt. Mud in shallow lakes and pools; only the inflorescence emergent.

 river terraces, tundra, slopes; moderately well-drained areas; sand, moss.

 around the margins of ponds, marshes, along streams (on sand bars), seashores (in deltas, or in marshes just above the high tide line, frequently associating with obligate halophytes); imperfectly drained moist areas; sand, clay (alluvial); with low organic content, with high organic content; acidic, or calcareous, or non-calcareous (indifferent). A pioneer species.

 wet meadows, snow patches, around the margins of ponds, depressions of low-centre polygons, marshes, along streams, river terraces (and deltas), tundra, slopes (wet), ridges (along beaches, also in intervening swales), seashores; aquatic (ponds and streambeds), imperfectly drained moist areas, seepage slopes; gravel (rarely), sand, silt, clay (rarely), till, moss; with low organic content, with high organic content, peat (occasionally); acidic, or calcareous (usually). A plant of wet places, usually in sand or silt. Juncus biglumis typically inhabits wet sedge grass meadows, seepage areas, and creek and river flats. It occurs in various stages of colonisation: in bare mud or sand, and also in more developed vegetation, including thick moss carpets and peat.

 wet meadows, around the margins of ponds (and swales), marshes, along streams, river terraces; aquatic (occasionally), imperfectly drained moist areas, seepage slopes; rocks (on beach cobble), gravel, sand, silt, clay; with low organic content, with high organic content, peat (occasionally); calcareous. A plant of moist areas, typically growing in sedge wet meadows, along streams and rivers, and around the margins of ponds.

slopes; dry (In Europe, often a pioneer on new road verges, and in "slalom" slopes in ski areas, in northern mountains); gravel, sand. Occurs on springy or sandy slopes on Baffin Island. In the Beekman Peninsula, the plant is found in sheltered sandy sites, often in iron-rich sands.

wet meadows, around the margins of ponds, depressions of low-centre polygons (and in the centre of frost boils), marshes, along streams, river terraces, lakeshores (near deltas), tundra, slopes (wet), ridges (sand ridges and saturated silty beach swales), seashores (muddy flats just above tide level); imperfectly drained moist areas, seepage slopes (in Europe a mire and marsh specialist, almost everywhere in closed vegetation on turf); gravel, sand, silt, clay, till; with high organic content, peat (occasionally); acidic (reported on granite; CAN 259351), or calcareous (predominantly).

wet meadows (usually around the drier edges), hummocks (often Dryas), snow patches (occasionally), around the margins of ponds, depressions of low-centre polygons, along streams (sometimes in dry streambeds), lakeshores, tundra, ridges (often on old beaches, gullies, moraines or rock outcrops), seashores; imperfectly drained moist areas (towards the outer edges, with L. nivalis growing in wetter areas, e.g., on Melville Island), seepage slopes, dry, moderately well-drained areas (more commonly); rocks, gravel (often on beaches), sand, till, moss; with low organic content, with high organic content, peat; acidic (found on weakly acidic sandstone, granite and sand), or calcareous. Often described as locally abundant; "ubiquitous- one of the commonest plants everywhere

 ridges, cliffs; dry; rocks, gravel (screes); with low organic content; calcareous (or non-acidic). Crevices and ledges on cliffs, occasionally on rocky slopes, mostly slate and calcareous rocks.

 